feat(encyclopedia): added new pages to explain the Temporal architecture (#4731)
temporalio/documentation: docs/encyclopedia/architecture/temporal-architecture.mdx

---
id: temporal-architecture
title: Temporal architecture
sidebar_label: Temporal architecture
description: A comprehensive guide to Temporal's architecture, covering how the platform orchestrates durable Workflow Executions through its Frontend, backend services, and Worker coordination.
toc_max_heading_level: 4
keywords:
  - architecture
  - durable execution
  - how temporal works
  - temporal service
tags:
  - Durable Execution
  - Temporal
  - Architecture
---

import { CaptionedImage } from '@site/src/components';

Before reading this, it would be helpful to read [Understanding Temporal](/evaluate/understanding-temporal) as it assumes knowledge of the following introductory concepts: Workflow, Activity, Worker, Task Queues, and Event History.

Temporal is a tool that abstracts away a lot of difficulty for anyone managing applications that need to be resilient to failures. This guide provides you with a high level overview of how Temporal works under the hood.

## Application structure recap

Before diving into the architecture, let's recap what you're responsible for as a developer. 

> As a developer, you are responsible for the Temporal Application code which includes writing the Activity Definition, Workflow Definition, and the code to configure and start the Workers that coordinate with a Temporal Service to execute your Workflow and Activity code. 

Reviewer: The beginning of this sentence seems a bit repetitive with the previous paragraph. I'd suggest closing it up, so it looks like this: 
```suggestion
Before diving into the architecture, let's recap what you're responsible for as a developer: the Temporal Application code, which includes writing the Activity Definition, Workflow Definition...
```

As part of the Temporal Platform, the Temporal Service runs the Temporal Server with its database and optional components, and is responsible for orchestrating execution. A Temporal application gains its durability, scalability, and reliability from the support provided by the Temporal Service.

<div style={{ display: 'flex', justifyContent: 'center', margin: '2rem 0' }}>
  <CaptionedImage
    src="/img/encyclopedia/architecture/your-environment-and-temporal-service.png"
    srcDark="/img/encyclopedia/architecture/your-environment-and-temporal-service-dark.png"
    alt="Diagram of your application environment with Workflow code, Workers, and the Temporal SDK connecting to the Temporal Service"
    width="90%"
  />
</div>

In the wider platform, there are three kinds of clients that talk to the Temporal Server:

- Temporal's [command-line interface (CLI)](/cli)

> - Temporal's web-based user interface (Web UI)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Temporal's [web-based user interface (Web UI)](/web-ui)
```

- A [Temporal Client](#client-application) embedded into the applications you run

## Client application

Temporal Clients offer a set of APIs to communicate with a Temporal Service. They are one aspect of your Temporal application and provided by a Temporal SDK. You instantiate and use it in your own application code to start and manage Workflow Executions.

Consider the example of an order processing system. 

A Temporal Client lets you:

> - **Start a Workflow Execution**, for example, when a customer places an order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Start a Workflow Execution** when a customer places an order.
```

- **Signal a Workflow Execution** to update the order if the customer changes their shipping address.
- **Query a Workflow Execution** to retrieve the current status of the order.
- **List Workflow Executions** to view all orders being processed.
- **Get the result of a Workflow Execution** to retrieve the final outcome of the order processing. 

> Clients are responsible for starting Workflows by sending requests to initiate new Workflow Executions. They can query Workflows to retrieve current state or synchronous data from running Workflows and signal Workflows to send asynchronous messages that influence their behavior. Clients also manage Workflows by canceling, terminating, or describing Workflow Executions.

Reviewer: Not too sure about that last sentence. Canceling and terminating may be different things, but at this level of explanation, that seems like an unnecessary distinction. But "canceling, terminating, and describing" isn't parallel. Wouldn't "describing" happen when the Workflow is initiated?

Author: Hmm... good point. Let's remove "describing" here and leave it as "canceling or terminating".

## The Temporal Server 

The Temporal Server is the heart of the platform. It's responsible for orchestrating Workflow Execution, maintaining state, and ensuring reliability.

> The Temporal Server consists of a Frontend and multiple backend services, plus a database as a required external component. A Temporal Server may also include some optional components, such as Elasticsearch for advanced search visibility or Grafana for creating operational dashboards for observability.

Reviewer: We capitalize Frontend, but not backend?

Author: I don't think we've historically capitalized "backend", but we have with "Frontend". I think it's ok to leave it lowercase since we're talking about several things instead of just the one.

<div style={{ display: 'flex', justifyContent: 'center', margin: '2rem 0' }}>
  <CaptionedImage
    src="/img/encyclopedia/architecture/temporal-server-internals.png"
    srcDark="/img/encyclopedia/architecture/temporal-server-internals-dark.png"
    alt="Diagram of the Temporal Server with Frontend, History, Matching, and Worker services connected to a database and Elasticsearch"
    width="80%"
  />
</div>

### Frontend Service

From your application's perspective, the Frontend Service is the Temporal endpoint your Temporal Client talks to. Your client sends requests (start Workflow, Signal, Query, etc.) to the Frontend, and the Frontend forwards them to the appropriate backend services.

> It handles rate limiting, authorization, validation, and routing requests internally to the right subsystem. Clients never communicate directly with backend services or Workers so everything goes through this unified entry point.

Reviewer: Nitpick, but I feel like "everything" is a little vague. Would "all messages" or "all communication" be better?

Author: How's "all requests"?

### Temporal Service backend

> The backend consists of several specialized services including the History, Matching, Worker, and a Persistence Layer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The backend consists of several specialized services including the History, Matching, and Worker services, and a Persistence Layer.
```

#### History Service

The History Service is the part of Temporal that keeps track of everything that happens in each Workflow. It writes an ordered [Event History](/encyclopedia/event-history/) to the database so Temporal always knows what has happened. This includes when a Workflow started, Activities ran, Signals were received, timers fired, and when it completed or failed. 

> The Event History (every event/step of each Workflow) is the key to making your application reliable and crash-proof. When an error or failure happens in your app, Temporal will recreate the state by parsing the Event History and replay each step.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Event History (every event/step of each Workflow) is the key to making your application reliable and crash-proof. When an error or failure happens in your app, Temporal will recreate the state by parsing the Event History and replaying each step.
```

When a Workflow Task or Activity needs to be done, the Matching Service finds an appropriate Worker polling the queue and hands off the Task.

#### Worker Service

The Worker Service is where all of the background functionality that keeps the Temporal Service running smoothly is handled. It takes care of all the internal/system Workflows that Temporal needs like maintenance jobs, cleanup, replication, archival, and visibility indexing. You won't need to directly interact with this layer because it's different from your application Workers. The Worker Service handles Temporal's own operational tasks, like archiving old Event Histories or running scheduled maintenance.

#### Persistence layer

You can configure the database that you want to store Workflow state, Event History, and Task Queues. You can choose between Cassandra, MySQL, PostgreSQL, and SQLite. This is also where you store metadata about your Workflows and other data that needs to be recorded in order to ensure Durable Execution. This persistence enables recovery and replay - if anything fails, Temporal can reconstruct the exact state of a Workflow from its Event History.

> Application [Workers](/workers#worker) run your Workflow and Activity code on your own infrastructure; for how they coordinate with the Server, see [How Temporal works](/encyclopedia/architecture/how-temporal-works).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Application [Workers](/workers#worker) run your Workflow and Activity code on your own infrastructure. For how they coordinate with the Server, see [How Temporal works](/encyclopedia/architecture/how-temporal-works).
```

---
id: temporal-architecture
title: Temporal architecture
sidebar_label: Temporal architecture
description: A comprehensive guide to Temporal's architecture, covering how the platform orchestrates durable Workflow Executions through its Frontend, backend services, and Worker coordination.
toc_max_heading_level: 4
keywords:
  - architecture
  - durable execution
  - how temporal works
  - temporal service
tags:
  - Durable Execution
  - Temporal
  - Architecture
---

import { EnlargeImage } from '@site/src/components';

Before reading this, it would be helpful to read [Understanding Temporal](/evaluate/understanding-temporal) as it assumes knowledge of the following introductory concepts: Workflow, Activity, Worker, Task Queues, and Event History.

Temporal is a tool that abstracts away a lot of difficulty for anyone managing applications that need to be resilient to failures. This guide provides you with a high level overview of how Temporal works under the hood.

> ## Application Structure Recap

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Application structure recap
```

Before diving into the architecture, let's recap what you're responsible for as a developer. 

As a developer, you are responsible for the Temporal Application code which includes writing the Activity Definition, Workflow Definition, and the code to configure and start the Workers that coordinate with a Temporal Service to execute your Workflow and Activity code. 

As part of the Temporal Platform, we also have the Temporal Service, which runs the Temporal Server with its database and optional components, and is responsible for orchestrating execution. A Temporal application gains its durability, scalability, and reliability from the support provided by the Temporal Service.

## Overall architecture diagram

To understand how Temporal works, you can start at the high level architecture view. This shows how all of the different layers interact with each other. Then you can take a deep dive into each layer.

> <EnlargeImage

Reviewer 2: This diagram is a bit too complex. Even when enlarged, I can barely read the text. Even if the text was legible, I still feel like there is too much detail in a single diagram. 

I think we should remove maybe like 2 levels of details from this. And then in each of the individual component we add the details back. So for example Temporal service just has the 4 services, not the box about what they do. We then add those back when we get to the individual services.

  src="/img/encyclopedia/architecture/overall_architecture.png"
  alt="Overview of the Temporal architecture"
/>

## Client application

> A Temporal Client is one aspect of your Temporal application and provided by a Temporal SDK. It offers a set of APIs to communicate with a Temporal Service. You instantiate and use it in your own application code to start and manage Workflow Executions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Temporal Clients offer a set of APIs to communicate with a Temporal Service. They are one aspect of your Temporal application and provided by a Temporal SDK. You instantiate and use it in your own application code to start and manage Workflow Executions.
```
I think move the meaty definitive sentence to the front?

> In the wider platform, there are three kinds of clients that talk to the Temporal Server:

Reviewer 2: This gets a little confusing for me. The preceding definition just before this seems to suggest that only the third bullet is what we are talking about here. I think we either move this list up, and then use prose to zero in on the temporal client, or remove this list to reduce confusion

Author: I moved the list up and added a couple of links.

## The Temporal Server 

The Temporal Server is the heart of the platform. It's responsible for orchestrating Workflow Execution, maintaining state, and ensuring reliability.

The Temporal Server consists of a frontend and multiple backend services, plus a database as a required external component. A Temporal Server may also include some optional components, such as Elasticsearch for advanced search visibility or Grafana for creating operational dashboards for observability.

### Frontend Service

From your application's perspective, the Frontend Service is the Temporal endpoint your Temporal Client talks to. Your client sends requests (start Workflow, Signal, Query, etc.) to the Frontend, and the Frontend forwards them to the appropriate backend services.

It handles rate limiting, authorization, validation, and routing requests internally to the right subsystem. Clients never communicate directly with backend services or Workers so everything goes through this unified entry point.

> ### Temporal Service Backend

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Temporal Service backend
```

The backend consists of several specialized services including the History, Matching, Worker, and a Persistence Layer.

#### History Service

> The History Service is the part of Temporal that keeps track of everything that happens in each Workflow. It writes an ordered "event history" to the database so Temporal always knows what has happened. This includes when a Workflow started, Activities ran, Signals were received, timers fired, and when it completed or failed. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The History Service is the part of Temporal that keeps track of everything that happens in each Workflow. It writes an ordered Event History to the database so Temporal always knows what has happened. This includes when a Workflow started, Activities ran, Signals were received, timers fired, and when it completed or failed. 
```
I don't think we need quotes here for a core concept. We should probably actually link to the Event History page here

> The Event History (every event/step of each workflow) is the key to making your application reliable and crash-proof. When an error or failure happens in your app, Temporal will recreate the state by parsing the event history and replay each step. That's why determinism and idempotency are important when you're creating your Workflows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Event History (every event/step of each workflow) is the key to making your application reliable and crash-proof. When an error or failure happens in your app, Temporal will recreate the state by parsing the Event History and replay each step. 
```
I think simply saying that "determinism and idempotency are important" is a bit vague. We have dedicated messaging on this subject somehwere in the docs I think. We should link to that instead instead of simply saying it's "important". Otherwise I feel like it could create the confusion of "Your applications must be deterministic" issue that we had to combat before in AI agents

> The History Service is a central part of how Temporal provides durable execution. It persists all Workflow Execution state, including the event history, any mutable state, and internal task queues like timers, transfers, replication, and visibility/indexing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The History Service is a central part of how Temporal provides Durable Execution. It persists all Workflow Execution state, including the Event History, any mutable state, and internal task queues like timers, transfers, replication, and visibility/indexing.
```

#### Matching Service

> The Matching Service manages most of the coordination with the other services, especially the Task Queues or Task Queue partitions. This is where Tasks are dispatched to their respective queues before being picked up by the corresponding Workers. To determine how many more Tasks should be sent to a Worker from the Task Queue, Worker polling also takes place here. This is how tasks are dispatched to different queues before being sent to a Worker.

Reviewer 2: "To determine how many more Tasks should be sent to a Worker from the Task Queue, Worker polling also takes place here."

This sounds a little odd to me. Workers poll the frontend, not the matching service right?

When a Workflow Task or Activity needs to be done, the matching service finds an appropriate Worker polling the queue and hands off the task.

#### Worker Service

The Worker Service is where all of the background functionality that keeps the Temporal Service running smoothly is handled. It takes care of all the internal/system Workflows that Temporal needs like maintenance jobs, cleanup, replication, archival, and visibility indexing. You won't need to directly interact with this layer because it's different from your application Workers. The Worker Service handles Temporal's own operational tasks, like archiving old Event histories or running scheduled maintenance.

> #### Persistence Layer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Persistence layer
```

### External services 

External services are anything outside of your own application code and outside Temporal itself. Examples include third‑party APIs, databases that store customer data, or messaging systems.

Inside the Temporal Service, the main services (Frontend, History, Matching, and the internal Worker Service) are set up so they can be scaled independently. You can run many copies of Frontend and Matching, and the History Service spreads its work across "shards," so each part can grow based on load.

Temporal can also integrate with Elasticsearch to provide advanced search and visibility capabilities for Workflow Executions. Without it, you're limited to basic filtering. Grafana can be used to enable operational dashboards and monitoring for the Temporal Service itself.

> ## Infrastructure

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if this section adds much value compared with the rest to explain Temporal architecture. It reads a little more like marketing copy to me, and I feel like it's not in the right place.

Reviewer 3: Yeah maybe for the sake of brevity we can drop this. I wrote it to touch on the deployment landscape but it's more general and might fit better on Understanding Temporal or a separate page. Some of the content is repeated in other areas so it seems ok to drop.

When a Workflow Task or Activity needs to be done, the matching service finds an appropriate Worker polling the queue and hands off the task.

#### Worker Service

The Worker Service is where all of the background functionality that keeps the Temporal Service running smoothly is handled. It takes care of all the internal/system Workflows that Temporal needs like maintenance jobs, cleanup, replication, archival, and visibility indexing. You won't need to directly interact with this layer because it's different from your application Workers. The Worker Service handles Temporal's own operational tasks, like archiving old Event histories or running scheduled maintenance.

#### Persistence layer

You can configure the database that you want to store Workflow state, event history, and Task Queues. You can choose between Cassandra, MySQL, PostgreSQL, and SQLite. This is also where you store metadata about your Workflows and other data that needs to be recorded in order to ensure durable execution. This persistence enables recovery and replay - if anything fails, Temporal can reconstruct the exact state of a Workflow from its Event History.

## Infrastructure

> This is where the code for your Workers, Workflows, Activities, Signals, Updates, and Queries get executed on your own infrastructure. This is where you can scale up the number of Workers to increase how many Workflows can run simultaneously.

Reviewer 3: I'm looking at the infrastructure section and reading it over - I'm thinking it could be shortened since many of the concepts are already stated. Update: I removed it since this seems like more so content they can find on Understanding Temporal or that can be added to that page.
